Adding Djoufson as an author and writing a post article about efcore and .NET 6 (#19)
osscameroon/blog: data/blog/intro-to-entity-framework-core-in-net-6.md

---
title: Intro to Entity Framework Core in .NET 6
date: '2023-07-19'
tags: ['C#', '.NET', 'efcore', 'Csharp']
draft: false

> summary: Entity framework is a .NET tool to interact with various kind of databases, providing the same api for each of these database providers. In this blog post, you will see how to set un Entity Framework and build your first CRUD operation over a Sqlite database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Entity framework is a .NET tool to interact with various kind of databases, providing the same API for each of these database providers. In this blog post, you will see how to set an Entity Framework and build your first CRUD operation over a SQLite database
```

There are other parts of the article where some of these typos/bad capitalization happen. Can you update them as well?

images: []
layout: PostLayout
canonicalUrl: ''
authors: ['djoufson']
---

> # Intro to Entity Framework Core in .NET 6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Introduction to Entity Framework Core in .NET 6
```

![Intro to Entity Framework Core in .NET 6](/static/images/posts/intro-to-entity-framework-core-in-net-6/banner.jpg)

Entity framework is a .NET tool to interact with various kind of databases, providing the same api for each of these database providers. In this blog post, you will see how to set un Entity Framework and build your first CRUD operation over a Sqlite database

# Overview

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Project setup](#project-setup)
- [Create the entities](#create-the-entities)
- [Connect to the database](#connect-to-the-database)
- [Test over the database](#test-over-the-database)
- [Next steps](#next-steps)

# Requirements

> For this tutorial I'll be using Vs Code as my code editor, and all the stuff will be made through CLI. You can use your favorite Code editor, and your favorite CLI tool (Powershell, CMD, cmdr ...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this tutorial I'll use VS Code as my code editor, and all the stuff will be made through CLI. You can use your favorite code editor, and your favorite CLI tool (Powershell, CMD, cmdr ...) 
```

## Install .NET

> Since this is a demo of efcore using .NET 6, you first need to download and install the [.NET 6 SDK](). Make sure you install the one compatible with your processor architecture.

Reviewer: There are no links to the .NET 6 SDK

## Install efcore cli tool

To install the CLI tool of Entity framework, you need to run the following commands

```shell
dotnet tool install --global dotnet-ef
```

```shell
dotnet tool update --global dotnet-ef
```

After those two commands, you can run the next one to confirm that everything was installed successfully:

```shell
dotnet ef
```

And the output should be:

> ![Test Ef core installation](/static/images/posts/intro-to-entity-framework-core-in-net-6/ef-test.png)

Reviewer: Make this as a code block

Reviewer 2: Okay

# Project setup

Once the required tools are installed, we can go ahead and create our C# project.

> To follow along with me, you should run the exact commands shown below. I will obviously explain why I run a specific command, and what is it for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow along with me, you should run the exact commands shown below. I will explain why I run a specific command, and what it is for.
```

## Create a Console project

```shell
dotnet new console -o "Ef-Intro"
```

```shell
cd Ef-Intro
```

Those two commands are to create a blank .NET Console application. Open the `Ef-Intro` created folder in your code editor.

To run the project, type:

```shell
dotnet run
```

`Output`

```
Hello, World!
```

## Install Entity Framework Packages

Type the following commands in the root directory of your project

```shell
dotnet add package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Tools --version 7.0.5
```

```shell
dotnet add package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design --version 7.0.5
```

```shell
dotnet add package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore --version 7.0.5
```

```shell

> dotnet add package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Sqlite.Core --version 7.0.5

Reviewer: Is there a particular reason why you pin the version of entity core? If yes can you specify in the title of the blog post the version of efcore that you'd be using?

```

After that, your Ef-Intro.csproj file should look like:

```XML
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net6.0</TargetFramework>
    <RootNamespace>Ef_Intro</RootNamespace>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore" Version="7.0.5" />
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design" Version="7.0.5">
      <PrivateAssets>all</PrivateAssets>
      <IncludeAssets>runtime; build; native; contentfiles; analyzers; buildtransitive</IncludeAssets>
    </PackageReference>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Sqlite" Version="7.0.5" />
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Tools" Version="7.0.5">
      <IncludeAssets>runtime; build; native; contentfiles; analyzers; buildtransitive</IncludeAssets>
      <PrivateAssets>all</PrivateAssets>
    </PackageReference>
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>

```

Those are the required packages you have to install in order to properly work with Ef Core

# Create the entities

> The application we are going to build is a simple stock application, that manage to stores the products list and prices in a database.To do so, we will need a single `Product` entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application we are going to build is a simple stock application, that manages to store the products list and prices in a database.To do so, we will need a single `Product` entity.
```

The entity will be the model used to materialize the results coming from our database

In the root project directory, create a folder called `Entities` and place there the `Product.cs` class as follows:

```
Entities/
|  |__ Product.cs
|
| Program.cs

```

The content of this class should look like:

```cs
namespace Ef_Intro.Entities;

public class Product
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; } = string.Empty;
    public decimal Price { get; set; }
    public int Quantity { get; set; }
}
```

# Connect to the database

## Create the DbContext

> The `DbContext` is a class that allows us to have database access over the existing tables, and this class is in charge of tracking modifications on the database and sync those ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DbContext` is a class that allows us to have database access over the existing tables, and this class is in charge of tracking modifications to the database and sync them.
```

I a folder called `Data`, create a ew file `AppDbContext.cs`.

```
Data/
|  |__ AppDbContext.cs
|
Entities/
|  |__ Product.cs
|
| Program.cs

```

> and fill it with the following content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and fill it with the following content:
```

```cs
using Ef_Intro.Entities;
using Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore;

namespace Ef_Intro.Data;

public class AppDbContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<Product> Products { get; set; } = null!;
    protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder optionsBuilder)
    {
        optionsBuilder.UseSqlite("Data Source=app.db");
    }
}
```

Here we initialize our DbContext to have a single DbSet mapped to the `Product` class, and the resulting Sqlite database will be stored in the `app.db` file.

## Create and Run the migrations

> A migration is a way to design the database scheme, and keep track of the updates we made over our database scheme and design. It has indications about how the database should look like, which tables has which columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A migration is a way to design the database schema, and keep track of the updates we made over our database schema and design. It has indications about how the database should look like, which tables has which columns.
```

**To create a migration, we run the command**

```shell
dotnet ef migrations add "Initial Create"
```

Where `"Initial Create"` is just the given name of our migration.

**To run our migration, we run the command**

```shell
dotnet ef database update
```

> Once those two commands completed, you should be able to see the `app.db` file created in your root project directory, and if you open this file in your favorite Sqlite db explorer, you should see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once those two commands are completed, you should be able to see the `app.db` file created in your root project directory, and if you open this file in your favorite Sqlite db explorer, you should see:
```

![Database scheme](/static/images/posts/intro-to-entity-framework-core-in-net-6/dbscheme.png)

This means that our Database has been updated successfully, according to the Migration specifications.

We can finally test it.

# Test over the database

Now that we have a running database, we can test our database.

First, as we do things the right way, we will create in a `Services` folder, all the interfaces and their concrete implementations. We will need two services, the `IInputManager` responsible to proceed an action based on the selected option, and the `IProductsService` responsible of the CRUD operations over the `Product` entity table in our database.

Here is the content of those files.

### IInputManager

```cs
namespace Ef_Intro.Services;

public interface IInputManager
{
    bool Proceed(int input);
}
```

### IProductsService

```cs
using Ef_Intro.Entities;

namespace Ef_Intro.Services;

public interface IProductsService
{
    Product Add(Product product);
    Product? Get(int id);
    Product? Update(int id, decimal newPrice);
    bool Delete(int id);
    IReadOnlyList<Product> GetAll();
}
```

> Then, in the same folder we create the corresponding implementations of each service like follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, in the same folder we create the corresponding implementations of each service like follows:
```

    {
        int id = GetIntInput("Enter Product Id: ");
        if(id == -1)
            return false;
        else
        {
            decimal price = GetIntInput("Enter Price: ");
            if(price == -1)
                return false;
            else
                return _productsService.Update(id, price) is not null;
        }
    }

    private bool PrintProducts()
    {
        var products = _productsService.GetAll();
        if(products is null)
            return false;
        else
        {
            Display.Products(products);
            return true;
        }
    }

    #region  Helper Methods
    private static string GetStringInput(string message)
    {
        Console.Write(message);
        return Console.ReadLine() ?? string.Empty;
    }

    private static int GetIntInput(string message)
    {
        Console.Write(message);
        return int.TryParse(Console.ReadLine(), out var result) ?
            result : -1;
    }

    private static decimal GetDecimalInput(string message)
    {
        Console.Write(message);
        return decimal.TryParse(Console.ReadLine(), out var result) ?
            result : -1;
    }
    #endregion
}
```

> And the other one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the other one:
```

            Console.WriteLine("Name: " + product.Name);
            Console.WriteLine("Price: " + product.Price);
            Console.WriteLine("Quantity: " + product.Quantity);
            Console.WriteLine("===============================");
        }
    }

    public static int Menu()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("1. Print products");
        Console.WriteLine("2. Add product");
        Console.WriteLine("3. Update product price");
        Console.WriteLine("4. Delete product");
        Console.WriteLine("5. Exit");
        Console.Write("Enter your choice: ");
        if (int.TryParse(Console.ReadLine(), out int choice))
        {
            return choice;
        }

        return -1;
    }

    public static void ResetConsole()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("\nPress any key to continue . . .");
        Console.ReadKey();
        Console.Clear();
    }

    internal static void InvalidInput()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("The input you submitted is not in a valid format");
        Console.WriteLine("\nPress any key to continue . . .");
        Console.ReadKey();
        Console.Clear();
    }
}
```

The entry point finally looks like.

> ### `Program.cs`

Reviewer: There's a formatting inconsistency here, why the backticks?

Reviewer 2: You are right there is inconsistency

```cs
using Ef_Intro.Data;
using Ef_Intro.Services;
using Ef_Intro.Utilities;

internal class Program
{
    private static void Main()
    {
        bool exit = false;
        // We instantiate our db context
        using var dbContext = new AppDbContext();
        IProductsService productsService = new ProductsService(dbContext);
        IInputManager inputManager = new InputManager(productsService);

        // We initialize the database
        Database.InitDatabase(dbContext);

        while (!exit)
        {
            int input = Display.Menu();
            exit = !inputManager.Proceed(input);
            Display.ResetConsole();
        }

        // We close the db context
        dbContext.Dispose();
    }
}
```

And by running the command

```shell
dotnet run
```

The output should be

> ![Output result](/static/images/posts/intro-to-entity-framework-core-in-net-6/output.png)

Reviewer: Can you put this output as a code block?

Reviewer 2: Okay I will
